Maier, civil religion

Maier, Pauline - American Scripture (1997)





democratic sovereignty

I think it's wrong that Supreme Courts decides if we have rights. It's not for it to decide.


Jefferson

1) The Republic of Letters: The Correspondence between Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, 1776-1826
Volume 1, 1776-1790 - 1995
p. 631

The question Whether one generation of men has a right to bind another, seems never to have been started [stated?] either on this or our side of the water.
...
I set out on this ground, which I suppose to be self evident, ‘that the earth belongs in usufruct to the living’: that the dead have neither powers nor rights over it.


Dead hand control: encyclopedia definition

2) Black's Law dictionary 12th edition (2024)

deadhand control
The convergense of various legal doctrines that allow a decedent's control of wealth to influence the conduct of a living 
rule against prepetuities


An answer: Originalsim
3) Originalism and the Rule of the Dead (2015)
https://www.nationalaffairs.com/publications/detail/originalism-and-the-rule-of-the-dead

We look upon our written laws, to cite Burke again, as "an entailed inheritance derived from our forefathers, and to be transmitted to our posterity — as an estate specially belonging to the people."


A review in New York Review of Books: a fear for constitution
4) Is the Constitution ‘Dead, Dead, Dead’? (2026)
https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2026/02/12/is-the-constitution-dead-dead-dead-we-the-people-lepore/

Repeatedly stating that her effort is descriptive, not prescriptive, Lepore nonetheless treats the low percentage of proposed amendments that have made it into the Constitution’s text as somehow demonstrating that a less onerous ratification process would have been better—a conclusion that obviously doesn’t follow. Whatever its value as social history, We the People is highly misleading as legal history and jeopardizes today’s urgent project of preserving our republic and protecting its surviving strands of democracy from the forces of tyranny—tyranny that Lepore abhors as much as anyone. Her history does so by inadvertently giving fuel to those who disparage the Constitution as an unacceptably flawed and compromised relic of a distant past, proclaim it to be frozen in time, and favor scrapping it and beginning anew.


Another form of Dead hand control: money

Social security: portrayed as a burden, work done in the past puts strain on modern workers

Standard Oil: capital produced around the turn of 20th century commands things today

Piketty, rate of return
5) Capital in the Twenty-First Century (2014)

When the rate of return on capital significantly exceeds the growth rate of the economy (as it did through much of history until the nineteenth century and as is likely to be the case again in the twenty-first century), then it logically follows that inherited wealth grows faster than output and income. People with inherited wealth need save only a portion of their income from capital to see that capital grow more quickly than the economy as a whole. Under such conditions, it is almost inevitable that inherited wealth will dominate wealth amassed from a lifetime’s labor by a wide margin, and the concentration of capital will attain extremely high levels—levels potentially incompatible with the meritocratic values and principles of social justice fundamental to modern democratic societies.

We are told that we live in a democracy and have a command over our lives, but large chunks of a society is out of reach. Dead hand control is the locus of power. What is off the charts is power. 

That's why private property is so detrimental. While it allows to resolve conflicts of interests, it also lock-in the property for ever and ever.

Madison, continuity


I noticed that challenge to the originalism is called a dead hand challenge. Our democratic sovereignty can be questioned because we are ruled by the dead. I guess the name is borrowed from dead hand control when a will can dictate a discharge of property long into the future. And in the US, this time is extended state by state. Aligning trends in the US. Belief in our founding truth and belief that dead can command property from the grave. Past weighs over the present.

We don't serve the dead, we serve the successors. That's the new right of kings. We worship the ancestors that vest power in our masters. 